README.md, before:

# Heart Disease Risk Analysis  
<font size="3">**Group-Project-4: Team 3**  
**Contributors:** Logan Severson, MaiDao Lor, Kyle Dalton, Cassia Yoon  
**Github link:** https://github.com/CassiaY/project-4-group-3  
**Slide link:** https://www.canva.com/design/DAF2Q4tnnNQ/2TqK71GT2WsZIIw5lsYwtA/view?utm_content=DAF2Q4tnnNQ&utm_campaign=designshare&utm_medium=link&utm_source=editor </font>  

## Project Overview  
For this project, we visualized heart disease data and used machine learning to predict if a patient is at risk of heart disease based on BRFSS data (Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System).  

## The Process  
### Part 1: The Data  
[BRFSS](/https://www.cdc.gov/brfss/index.html) data is a yearly phone (landline and cell) survey in the US conducted by the CDC. The survey collects health-related risk behaviors, chronic health conditions, and use of preventive services. The [Diabetes Health Indicators dataset](/https://archive.ics.uci.edu/dataset/891/cdc+diabetes+health+indicators) we use contains preprocessed data intended to study the relationship between lifestyle and diabetes in the US. For this project, we decided to use this dataset to study heart disease risk instead (the [csv file](/Resources/diabetes_binary_5050split_health_indicators_BRFSS2015.csv) can be found in the Resources folder). Sample of the dataset:  
![sample of the dataset](/readme_imgs/dataset_sample.png)  
The dataset was then stored in a cloud computing service. We used [Amazon Web Services](/https://aws.amazon.com/) using the [S3](/https://aws.amazon.com/s3/) service. In the machine learning code, the data file is accessed via a link that grants temporary public access.  

Seaborn was used to create a scatter plot of all the features vs target (see below). Due to the data having mostly binary data, the scatter plots had limited value.  
![data scatter plots](/readme_imgs/data_scatterplots_all.png)  

When reviewing this binary dataset, there are certain things that we took into consideration:  
1. Response bias: Did all groups in our population have an equal chance of responding?  
2. Representation: are all groups within our population adequately represented in the data?  
3. Data collection method: could the method of data collection such as cellular versus landline influence the responses? For example, younger people might be more likely to respond on a cell phone, while older individuals might prefer landlines. When working with survey data, it's common to encounter non-response bias. This happens when the respondents of the survey differ in meaningful ways from those who did not respond.  

We did some research to see how BRFSS Provides information on the background, data collection and processing, and the statistical, and analytical issues for the combined landline and cell phone data set. We found that:  
1. The behavioral risk factor surveillance system (BRFSS) doesn't have a specific way to include people who don't have access to a telephone and therefore couldn't participate in the survey.  
2. The BRFS uses a statistical technique called raking to adjust their data. This technique helps make the sample more representative of the entire population. If certain groups such as lower income people for example, are underrepresented and the survey responses, raking helps adjust the data to better reflect these groups presence in the overall population.  
4. Even though the BRFSS survey might not reach everyone, **they used statistical techniques (such as raking) to ensure their findings are accurate and as representative of the population as possible.**  


### Part 2: Machine Learning Model  
The code files were created in [Google Colab](/https://colab.google/) and used:  
- [scikit-learn](/https://scikit-learn.org/stable/) - a machine learning library for python  
- [keras-tuner](/https://keras.io/keras_tuner/) - a scalable hyperparameter optimization framework  
- [tensorflow](/https://www.tensorflow.org/) - a library for machine learning and artificial intelligence  
- [pandas](/https://pandas.pydata.org/) - a data analysis and manipulation tool for python  
- [matplotlib](/https://matplotlib.org/) - a library for creating static, animated, and interactive visualizations in Python  
- [seaborn](/https://seaborn.pydata.org/) - a Python data visualization library based on matplotlib  

The file [project_4_group_3_nn.ipynb](/project_4_group_3_nn.ipynb) contains the code used to train the machine learning model to predict heart disease. We used keras-tuner auto-optimization to find the optimal hyperparameters to achieve the highest prediction rating. The maximum number of layers was set to 5. The maximum number of neurons was set to 50, which is between 2-3 times the number of input features.  

![number of input features](/readme_imgs/n_features.png)  

The optimizer was able to achieve an **`accuracy score of 86.11%`** at a **`loss of 32.76%`**.  

![val_accuracy](/readme_imgs/best_model_eval.png)  

The hyperparameters for the best model found were:  
![best model hyperparameters](/readme_imgs/best_hps.png)  

This is the summary of the best model:  
<img src="https://github.com/CassiaY/project-4-group-3/blob/main/readme_imgs/best_model_summary.png?raw=true" width="500">

The best machine learning model was exported in three different verions: [just the weights](/Resources/project-4-group-3-nn-model.h5), the [full model in HDF5 format](/Resources/project-4-group-3-nn-model_full.h5) and the [full model in keras file format](/Resources/project-4-group-3-nn-model_full.keras). These files are found in the 'Resources' folder.  

The model file was then loaded into [project_4_group_3_plt.ipynb](/project_4_group_3_plt.ipynb) to plot the history of the accuracy and loss of the model:  
| Accuracy                                        | Loss                                    |
| ----------------------------------------------- | --------------------------------------- |
| ![accuracy graph](/readme_imgs/nn_accuracy.png) | ![loss graph](/readme_imgs/nn_loss.png) |

The model was also loaded into [project_4_group_3_weights](/project_4_group_3_weights.ipynb) to obtain the [weights](/readme_imgs/best_model_weights_sample.png).  

We did attempt to extract feature importance from the deep machine learning model, but were not able to succeed in the time given. However, it seems to be possible based on some examples seen online using LIME or SHAP tools. See the Resources section below for links regarding this topic.

Instead, to obtain information regarding feature importance, we trained a random forest model for the data by category and for overall. We also obtained confusion matrices for each category.    
#### Overall  
![all cm](/readme_imgs/rf_all_cm.png)  
![all f-imp](/readme_imgs/rf_all_feature_importances.png)  

#### Lifestyle  
![lifestyle cm](/readme_imgs/rf_lifestyle_cm.png)  
![lifestyle f-imp](/readme_imgs/rf_lifestyle_feature_importances.png)  

#### Health Status  
![health cm](/readme_imgs/rf_health_cm.png)  
![health f-imp](/readme_imgs/rf_health_feature_importances.png)  

#### Healthcare Access  
![healthcare cm](/readme_imgs/rf_healthcare_cm.png)  
![healthcare f-imp](/readme_imgs/rf_healthcare_feature_importances.png)  

#### Demographic  
![demographic cm](/readme_imgs/rf_demographics_cm.png)  
![demographic f-imp](/readme_imgs/rf_demographics_feature_importances.png)  

### Part 3: Visualizations  
To be able to create the visualizations in Tableau, the data needed to be decoded using the [BRFSS Codebook](/https://www.cdc.gov/brfss/annual_data/2015/pdf/2015_calculated_variables_version4.pdf), [Survey Questionnaire](/https://www.cdc.gov/brfss/questionnaires/pdf-ques/2015-brfss-questionnaire-12-29-14.pdf), and the variables table from the [UCI dataset website](/https://archive.ics.uci.edu/dataset/891/cdc+diabetes+health+indicators). For example, the data used codes for respondent's [income](/readme_imgs/questionnaire_income.png), [education level](/readme_imgs/questionnaire_education.png), and [age group](/readme_imgs/codebook_ages.png).  

#### Visualization 1:  
![age/gender graph](/readme_imgs/viz_age_gender.png)  
The goal is to view the relationship between age, gender, and the incidence of heart disease or attacks, while also displaying the total count of respondents within each age group. Tableau was used to create the bar graph and totaled the number of male and female respondents. Each bar is split into two colors, representing whether they have had heart disease or attacks. Light blue represents those that responded ‘no’ and dark blue is ‘yes’. Following the increasing age group, we notice a trend. The dark blue bars that represent yes respondents to heart disease or attacks cases, generally increase. This suggests that heart disease or attacks become more common as age increases. When looking at the colors within each bar, we see another pattern. In some age groups, the section representing males is taller than that for females, indicating that more men in these groups have experienced heart disease or attacks.

#### Visualization 2:  
![categories graph](/readme_imgs/viz_categories.png)  
Text ================================  

#### Visualization 3:  
![alc/smoking graph](/readme_imgs/viz_alc_smok.png)  
Over time, high blood pressure (hypertension) puts strain on the heart muscle and can lead to cardiovascular disease (CVD), which increases your risk of heart attack and stroke. Chemicals in cigarette smoke cause the blood to thicken and form clots inside veins and arteries. Blockage from a clot can lead to a heart attack and sudden death. While both have negative effects on your body, smoking increases the likelihood of getting any sort of heart disease/attack due to the various chemicals in he smoke that destroy your cells.  

#### Visualization 4:  
![age/bmi graph](/readme_imgs/viz_age_bmi.png)
Text ================================  

> Additional visualizations can be found in the folder [readme_imgs](/readme_imgs).

## Project Conclusions:  
Text ================================ ssssssssss
heavy drinking younger respondents with heart disease or attack was relatively higher (8%) than in older adults, declining to 2% in respondents over 80, why?
a. Are younger people engaging in riskier or more social behaviors, in spite of health?
b. have other would be respondents expired?
c. are older adults more responsible with their health?
Respondents with Heart Disease or Attack at a younger age were less likely to smoke just above 20% while older respondents were more likely.
a. Does this represent the cultural shift away from smoking?
b. Did the survey measure or included vaping? Is this represented?
Respondents with a BMI near or above 50 were far more likely to have Heart Disease or attack, especially over age 35.

## Resources  
- Dataset: https://archive.ics.uci.edu/dataset/891/cdc+diabetes+health+indicators  
- article discussing guideline for number of hidden layers: https://medium.com/geekculture/introduction-to-neural-network-2f8b8221fbd3#:~:text=Number%20of%20Neurons%20and%20Number%20of%20Layers%20in%20Hidden%20Layer&text=The%20number%20of%20hidden%20neurons,size%20of%20the%20output%20layer
- export entire model (architecture + weights): https://stackoverflow.com/questions/76825216/is-there-a-way-to-save-a-model-with-hyperparameters-and-weights-both-after-hyper
- saving and loading keras model: https://deeplizard.com/learn/video/7n1SpeudvAE#:~:text=To%20do%20so%2C%20we%20first,the%20saved%20model%20on%20disk.&text=We%20can%20verify%20that%20the,get_weights()%20on%20the%20model  
- getting keras model weights:  https://stackoverflow.com/questions/46817085/keras-interpreting-the-output-of-get-weights  
- getting feature importance from a keras model:  https://datascience.stackexchange.com/questions/74661/feature-importance-in-neural-networks
- LIME vs SHAP: https://www.kdnuggets.com/2020/01/explaining-black-box-models-ensemble-deep-learning-lime-shap.html  
- shap usage example: https://colab.research.google.com/github/kweinmeister/notebooks/blob/master/tensorflow-shap-college-debt.ipynb#scrollTo=IytTh1pb0HGN  
- resize github readme img: https://stackoverflow.com/questions/24383700/resize-image-in-the-wiki-of-github-using-markdown  
- how to filter warning in colab: https://copyprogramming.com/howto/python-how-to-disable-warning-on-google-colab  
- S3 bucket granting public access: https://repost.aws/knowledge-center/read-access-objects-s3-bucket  
- how to get number of input features (other than counting): https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.decomposition.PCA.html  
- how to plot history of keras model: https://www.kaggle.com/code/danbrice/keras-plot-history-full-report-and-grid-search  

## Acknowledgements
We wish to thank our teaching staff:
- Hunter Hollis
- Sam Espe
- Randy Sendek

Commit message:

updated analysis of rf results

README.md, after:

# Heart Disease Risk Analysis  
<font size="3">**Group-Project-4: Team 3**  
**Contributors:** Logan Severson, MaiDao Lor, Kyle Dalton, Cassia Yoon  
**Github link:** https://github.com/CassiaY/project-4-group-3  
**Slide link:** https://www.canva.com/design/DAF2Q4tnnNQ/2TqK71GT2WsZIIw5lsYwtA/view?utm_content=DAF2Q4tnnNQ&utm_campaign=designshare&utm_medium=link&utm_source=editor </font>  

## Project Overview  
For this project, we visualized heart disease data and used machine learning to predict if a patient is at risk of heart disease based on BRFSS data (Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System).  

## The Process  
### Part 1: The Data  
[BRFSS](/https://www.cdc.gov/brfss/index.html) data is a yearly phone (landline and cell) survey in the US conducted by the CDC. The survey collects health-related risk behaviors, chronic health conditions, and use of preventive services. The [Diabetes Health Indicators dataset](/https://archive.ics.uci.edu/dataset/891/cdc+diabetes+health+indicators) we use contains preprocessed data intended to study the relationship between lifestyle and diabetes in the US. For this project, we decided to use this dataset to study heart disease risk instead (the [csv file](/Resources/diabetes_binary_5050split_health_indicators_BRFSS2015.csv) can be found in the Resources folder). Sample of the dataset:  
![sample of the dataset](/readme_imgs/dataset_sample.png)  
The dataset was then stored in a cloud computing service. We used [Amazon Web Services](/https://aws.amazon.com/) using the [S3](/https://aws.amazon.com/s3/) service. In the machine learning code, the data file is accessed via a link that grants temporary public access.  

Seaborn was used to create a scatter plot of all the features vs target (see below). Due to the data having mostly binary data, the scatter plots had limited value.  
![data scatter plots](/readme_imgs/data_scatterplots_all.png)  

When reviewing this binary dataset, there are certain things that we took into consideration:  
1. Response bias: Did all groups in our population have an equal chance of responding?  
2. Representation: are all groups within our population adequately represented in the data?  
3. Data collection method: could the method of data collection such as cellular versus landline influence the responses? For example, younger people might be more likely to respond on a cell phone, while older individuals might prefer landlines. When working with survey data, it's common to encounter non-response bias. This happens when the respondents of the survey differ in meaningful ways from those who did not respond.  

We did some research to see how BRFSS Provides information on the background, data collection and processing, and the statistical, and analytical issues for the combined landline and cell phone data set. We found that:  
1. The behavioral risk factor surveillance system (BRFSS) doesn't have a specific way to include people who don't have access to a telephone and therefore couldn't participate in the survey.  
2. The BRFS uses a statistical technique called raking to adjust their data. This technique helps make the sample more representative of the entire population. If certain groups such as lower income people for example, are underrepresented and the survey responses, raking helps adjust the data to better reflect these groups presence in the overall population.  
4. Even though the BRFSS survey might not reach everyone, **they used statistical techniques (such as raking) to ensure their findings are accurate and as representative of the population as possible.**  


### Part 2: Machine Learning Model  
The code files were created in [Google Colab](/https://colab.google/) and used:  
- [scikit-learn](/https://scikit-learn.org/stable/) - a machine learning library for python  
- [keras-tuner](/https://keras.io/keras_tuner/) - a scalable hyperparameter optimization framework  
- [tensorflow](/https://www.tensorflow.org/) - a library for machine learning and artificial intelligence  
- [pandas](/https://pandas.pydata.org/) - a data analysis and manipulation tool for python  
- [matplotlib](/https://matplotlib.org/) - a library for creating static, animated, and interactive visualizations in Python  
- [seaborn](/https://seaborn.pydata.org/) - a Python data visualization library based on matplotlib  

The file [project_4_group_3_nn.ipynb](/project_4_group_3_nn.ipynb) contains the code used to train the machine learning model to predict heart disease. We used keras-tuner auto-optimization to find the optimal hyperparameters to achieve the highest prediction rating. The maximum number of layers was set to 5. The maximum number of neurons was set to 50, which is between 2-3 times the number of input features.  

![number of input features](/readme_imgs/n_features.png)  

The optimizer was able to achieve an **`accuracy score of 86.11%`** at a **`loss of 32.76%`**.  

![val_accuracy](/readme_imgs/best_model_eval.png)  

The hyperparameters for the best model found were:  
![best model hyperparameters](/readme_imgs/best_hps.png)  

This is the summary of the best model:  
<img src="https://github.com/CassiaY/project-4-group-3/blob/main/readme_imgs/best_model_summary.png?raw=true" width="500">

The best machine learning model was exported in three different verions: [just the weights](/Resources/project-4-group-3-nn-model.h5), the [full model in HDF5 format](/Resources/project-4-group-3-nn-model_full.h5) and the [full model in keras file format](/Resources/project-4-group-3-nn-model_full.keras). These files are found in the 'Resources' folder.  

The model file was then loaded into [project_4_group_3_plt.ipynb](/project_4_group_3_plt.ipynb) to plot the history of the accuracy and loss of the model:  
| Accuracy                                        | Loss                                    |
| ----------------------------------------------- | --------------------------------------- |
| ![accuracy graph](/readme_imgs/nn_accuracy.png) | ![loss graph](/readme_imgs/nn_loss.png) |

The model was also loaded into [project_4_group_3_weights](/project_4_group_3_weights.ipynb) to obtain the [weights](/readme_imgs/best_model_weights_sample.png).  

We did attempt to extract feature importance from the deep machine learning model, but were not able to succeed in the time given. However, it seems to be possible based on some examples seen online using LIME or SHAP tools. See the Resources section below for links regarding this topic.

Instead, to obtain information regarding feature importance, we trained a random forest model for the data by category and for overall. We also obtained confusion matrices for each category.    
#### Overall  
![all cm](/readme_imgs/rf_all_cm.png)  
![all f-imp](/readme_imgs/rf_all_feature_importances.png)  

#### Lifestyle  
![lifestyle cm](/readme_imgs/rf_lifestyle_cm.png)  
![lifestyle f-imp](/readme_imgs/rf_lifestyle_feature_importances.png)  

#### Health Status  
![health cm](/readme_imgs/rf_health_cm.png)  
![health f-imp](/readme_imgs/rf_health_feature_importances.png)  

#### Healthcare Access  
![healthcare cm](/readme_imgs/rf_healthcare_cm.png)  
![healthcare f-imp](/readme_imgs/rf_healthcare_feature_importances.png)  

#### Demographic  
![demographic cm](/readme_imgs/rf_demographics_cm.png)  
![demographic f-imp](/readme_imgs/rf_demographics_feature_importances.png)  

Based on the random forest model results, we can see that the model is better at predicting who **will not** have a heart attack or heart disease rather than predicting whether they **will** have a heart attack or heart disease. The precision is high with 'no heart attack/disease' (85% or higher) but low with 'yes heart attack/disease' (between 0 and 51%). The recall and f1 scores follow similar trend of being higher with 'no heart attack/disease'. The accuracy score for all the categories is high at around 85% for all the categories. 

### Part 3: Visualizations  
To be able to create the visualizations in Tableau, the data needed to be decoded using the [BRFSS Codebook](/https://www.cdc.gov/brfss/annual_data/2015/pdf/2015_calculated_variables_version4.pdf), [Survey Questionnaire](/https://www.cdc.gov/brfss/questionnaires/pdf-ques/2015-brfss-questionnaire-12-29-14.pdf), and the variables table from the [UCI dataset website](/https://archive.ics.uci.edu/dataset/891/cdc+diabetes+health+indicators). For example, the data used codes for respondent's [income](/readme_imgs/questionnaire_income.png), [education level](/readme_imgs/questionnaire_education.png), and [age group](/readme_imgs/codebook_ages.png).  

#### Visualization 1:  
![age/gender graph](/readme_imgs/viz_age_gender.png)  
The goal is to view the relationship between age, gender, and the incidence of heart disease or attacks, while also displaying the total count of respondents within each age group. Tableau was used to create the bar graph and totaled the number of male and female respondents. Each bar is split into two colors, representing whether they have had heart disease or attacks. Light blue represents those that responded ‘no’ and dark blue is ‘yes’. Following the increasing age group, we notice a trend. The dark blue bars that represent yes respondents to heart disease or attacks cases, generally increase. This suggests that heart disease or attacks become more common as age increases. When looking at the colors within each bar, we see another pattern. In some age groups, the section representing males is taller than that for females, indicating that more men in these groups have experienced heart disease or attacks.

#### Visualization 2:  
![categories graph](/readme_imgs/viz_categories.png)  
Based on this graph, we can see that the top behavioral risk factors are: Cholesterol Check, Having Healthcare, Veggies/Fruits, and Physical activities. And other behavioral risk factors include: problems walking, high blood pressure, and heavy alcohol consumption.  

#### Visualization 3:  
![alc/smoking graph](/readme_imgs/viz_alc_smok.png)  
Over time, high blood pressure (hypertension) puts strain on the heart muscle and can lead to cardiovascular disease (CVD), which increases your risk of heart attack and stroke. Chemicals in cigarette smoke cause the blood to thicken and form clots inside veins and arteries. Blockage from a clot can lead to a heart attack and sudden death. While both have negative effects on your body, smoking increases the likelihood of getting any sort of heart disease/attack due to the various chemicals in he smoke that destroy your cells.  

#### Visualization 4:  
![age/bmi graph](/readme_imgs/viz_age_bmi.png)
Text ================================  

> Additional visualizations can be found in the folder [readme_imgs](/readme_imgs).

## Project Conclusions:  
========= txt  

## Resources  
- Dataset: https://archive.ics.uci.edu/dataset/891/cdc+diabetes+health+indicators  
- article discussing guideline for number of hidden layers: https://medium.com/geekculture/introduction-to-neural-network-2f8b8221fbd3#:~:text=Number%20of%20Neurons%20and%20Number%20of%20Layers%20in%20Hidden%20Layer&text=The%20number%20of%20hidden%20neurons,size%20of%20the%20output%20layer
- export entire model (architecture + weights): https://stackoverflow.com/questions/76825216/is-there-a-way-to-save-a-model-with-hyperparameters-and-weights-both-after-hyper
- saving and loading keras model: https://deeplizard.com/learn/video/7n1SpeudvAE#:~:text=To%20do%20so%2C%20we%20first,the%20saved%20model%20on%20disk.&text=We%20can%20verify%20that%20the,get_weights()%20on%20the%20model  
- getting keras model weights:  https://stackoverflow.com/questions/46817085/keras-interpreting-the-output-of-get-weights  
- getting feature importance from a keras model:  https://datascience.stackexchange.com/questions/74661/feature-importance-in-neural-networks
- LIME vs SHAP: https://www.kdnuggets.com/2020/01/explaining-black-box-models-ensemble-deep-learning-lime-shap.html  
- shap usage example: https://colab.research.google.com/github/kweinmeister/notebooks/blob/master/tensorflow-shap-college-debt.ipynb#scrollTo=IytTh1pb0HGN  
- resize github readme img: https://stackoverflow.com/questions/24383700/resize-image-in-the-wiki-of-github-using-markdown  
- how to filter warning in colab: https://copyprogramming.com/howto/python-how-to-disable-warning-on-google-colab  
- S3 bucket granting public access: https://repost.aws/knowledge-center/read-access-objects-s3-bucket  
- how to get number of input features (other than counting): https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.decomposition.PCA.html  
- how to plot history of keras model: https://www.kaggle.com/code/danbrice/keras-plot-history-full-report-and-grid-search  

## Acknowledgements
We wish to thank our teaching staff:
- Hunter Hollis
- Sam Espe
- Randy Sendek
